CMP-4236: Compliance Operator 1.9.0 Release Note Documentation (#109807)
openshift/openshift-docs: security/compliance_operator/compliance-operator-release-notes.adoc

For more information on compliance support for all Red{nbsp}Hat products, see link:https://access.redhat.com/compliance[Product Compliance].

[id="compliance-operator-release-notes-1-9-0_{context}"]
== OpenShift Compliance Operator 1.9.0

The following advisory is available for the OpenShift Compliance Operator 1.9.0:

* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHSA-2026:xxxx[RHSA-2026:xxxx - OpenShift Compliance Operator 1.9.0 bug fix and enhancement update]

[id="compliance-operator-1-9-0-new-features-and-enhancements_{context}"]
=== New features and enhancements

> * With this update, the Compliance Operator provides the Common Expression Language (CEL) scanner in TECH PREVIEW status. The CEL scanner implements a new `CustomRule` Custom Resource Definition (CRD) that allows administrators to define and enforce custom security policies using CEL expressions. This new content format does not replace the existing XCCDF (Extensible Configuration Checklist Description Format) profiles but extends the ability to comply with custom security policies. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-3118[CMP-3118]).

Author: Release notes do not adhere to this DITA prescription.

> * With this update, the Compliance Operator provides the Common Expression Language (CEL) scanner in General Availability status. The CEL scanner implements the `CustomRule` Custom Resource Definition (CRD), providing a method for administrators to define and enforce custom security policies using CEL expressions. This new content format does not replace the existing XCCDF (Extensible Configuration Checklist Description Format) profiles but extends the ability to comply with custom security policies. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4134[CMP-4134]).

Reviewer: @GroceryBoyJr We are adding support for CEL scanning on the Rules we ship out of the box, but I think it will still remain as Tech Preview. We are not at this moment shipping any Rule or Profile with CEL support.
CC:@rhmdnd @Vincent056

Reviewer 2: I think this can be two parts, one part is ```
The Compliance Operator provides the Common Expression Language (CEL) scanner in General Availability status```

The other one is the support CEL in the regular rule profile bundle

Author: @yuumasato @Vincent056  I'm trying to understand, is this correct? "CEL scanning is GA, but CEL custom rules are Tech Preview?"

Reviewer: I think we should gather more feedback and migrate more rules before maturing CEL scanning as GA.
I would keep the Common Expression Language (CEL) scanner in TECH PREVIEW status.
And would note that support for CEL has been expanded from CustomRules to Rules as well, still as Tech Preview.

Author: @yuumasato @Vincent056 Please take a look at the New features and enhancements paragraph again. I have edited it to make it all Tech Preview status and although it is still one paragraph, it brings out the two different ideas that Vincent mentioned.

For more information on compliance support for all Red{nbsp}Hat products, see link:https://access.redhat.com/compliance[Product Compliance].

[id="compliance-operator-release-notes-1-9-0_{context}"]
== OpenShift Compliance Operator 1.9.0

The following advisory is available for the OpenShift Compliance Operator 1.9.0:

* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHSA-2026:8433[RHSA-2026:8433 - OpenShift Compliance Operator 1.9.0 bug fix and enhancement update]

[id="compliance-operator-1-9-0-new-features-and-enhancements_{context}"]

> === New features and enhancements

Reviewer: @GroceryBoyJr  We should mention https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-3974 and https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-3520 too.

Reviewer: Disconsider and just resolve this, I had added this before you refreshed the PR.

Author: OK, thank you! This is done.

> * With this update, the Compliance Operator provides the Common Expression Language (CEL) scanner in Tech Preview status. The CEL scanner implements the `CustomRule` Custom Resource Definition (CRD), providing a method for administrators to define and enforce custom security policies using CEL expressions. This new content format has been expanded to `Rules` also, in Tech Preview status. CEL does not replace the existing XCCDF (Extensible Configuration Checklist Description Format) profiles but extends the ability to comply with custom security policies. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4134[CMP-4134]).

Reviewer: It is a bit confusing to me why the first two sentences are identical to CO 1.8.0 Release Notes.

```suggestion
* With this update, the Compliance Operator has extended the Common Expression Language (CEL) scanner to `Rules`, still in Tech Preview status. CEL does not replace the existing XCCDF (Extensible Configuration Checklist Description Format) profiles but extends the ability to comply with custom security policies. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4134[CMP-4134]).
```

Author: @yuumasato this is done, thank you!

For more information on compliance support for all Red{nbsp}Hat products, see link:https://access.redhat.com/compliance[Product Compliance].

[id="compliance-operator-release-notes-1-9-0_{context}"]
== OpenShift Compliance Operator 1.9.0

> The following advisory is available for the OpenShift Compliance Operator 1.9.0:

Reviewer 3: I am not sure what the situation is with this release notes assembly regarding DITA compliance, whether there are future plans to modularize existing content and add other things like [role="_abstract"] tags to short descriptions. 

Though unless there is a reason to do otherwise, I would recommend adding future release note updates to this file in appropriate modules, and otherwise satisfy the ascii-dita-vale check rules for all new content. It would simply be less work for whoever has to go back and do a CQA of this content.

* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHSA-2026:8433[RHSA-2026:8433 - OpenShift Compliance Operator 1.9.0 bug fix and enhancement update]

[id="compliance-operator-1-9-0-new-features-and-enhancements_{context}"]
=== New features and enhancements

> * With this update, the Compliance Operator has extended the Common Expression Language (CEL) scanner to `Rules`, in Tech Preview status. CEL does not replace the existing XCCDF (Extensible Configuration Checklist Description Format) profiles but extends the ability to comply with custom security policies. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4134[CMP-4134]).

Reviewer 3: In our published docs, tech preview should be expanded to its full term:

```suggestion
* With this update, the Compliance Operator has extended the Common Expression Language (CEL) scanner to `Rules`, in Technology Preview status. CEL does not replace the existing XCCDF (Extensible Configuration Checklist Description Format) profiles but extends the ability to comply with custom security policies. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4134[CMP-4134]).
```

> * With this update, the Compliance Operator provides the Common Expression Language (CEL) scanner in Tech Preview status. The CEL scanner implements the `CustomRule` Custom Resource Definition (CRD), providing a method for administrators to define and enforce custom security policies using CEL expressions. This new content format has been expanded to `Rules` also, in Tech Preview status. CEL does not replace the existing XCCDF (Extensible Configuration Checklist Description Format) profiles but extends the ability to comply with custom security policies. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4134[CMP-4134]).

Author: Exception for release notes.

[id="compliance-operator-1-9-0-bug-fixes_{context}"]

> === Bug Fixes

Author: Agreed. CQA work pending.

> * With this release, Compliance Operator now allows custom attributes defined in `ComplianceRule` objects to be automatically propagated to the corresponding `ComplianceCheckResult` objects. For more information, see (link:https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CMP-3974[CMP-3974])

Reviewer 3: Missing an article and a period:

```suggestion
* With this release, the Compliance Operator now allows custom attributes defined in `ComplianceRule` objects to be automatically propagated to the corresponding `ComplianceCheckResult` objects. For more information, see (link:https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CMP-3974[CMP-3974]).
```

> * With this release, Compliance Operator now supports CIS OpenShift benchmark version 1.9.0. Version 1.7.0 is now deprecated. For more information, see (link:https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CMP-3520[CMP-3520])

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* With this release, the Compliance Operator now supports CIS OpenShift benchmark version 1.9.0. Version 1.7.0 is now deprecated. For more information, see (link:https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CMP-3520[CMP-3520]).
```

Reviewer 3: A number of entries in the bug fix section are also missing a "the" before the Compliance Operator, and those should be addressed as well

> *  Before this release, Compliance Operator would create an unbound `ServiceAccount` token used for metrics access. This could raise a security concern over an unused token. With this release, the unbound `ServiceAccount` token is not created. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-3743[CMP-3743]).

Author: Except for release notes.

> *  Before this release, Compliance Operator could fail to correctly fetch machine configurations on OpenShift v4.21+. With this release, machine configurations are correctly fetched in OpenShift v4.21+. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-3763[CMP-3763]).

Author: Except for release notes

> *  Before this release, Compliance Operator could fail to correctly fetch machine configurations on OpenShift v4.21+. With this release, machine configurations are correctly fetched in OpenShift v4.21+. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-3763[CMP-3763]).

Reviewer: This bug was opened by us, and it is not clear if customer faced this problem. We could probably drop this?

Author: Deleted, thank you!

> *  Previously, for multiple SSH configuration drop-in configuration files, Compliance Operator was unable to correctly choose what SSH configuration options should take precedence. With this release, remediating SSH findings only results in updating a single rule instead of updating remediation for all SSH rules. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-3916[CMP-3916]).

Reviewer: This was was actually addressed in CO 1.8.0.
We backported the fix but didn't correct the ticket's release version tracked.

Author: @yuumasato Agreed. I was going to mention that, but it was in the list, so I included it. I am glad to remove it if you wish. (The "multiple SSH configuration drop-in" item, right?)

Reviewer: Yeah, let's remove this entry.

Author: Done, thank you @yuumasato

> *  Previously, for multiple SSH configuration drop-in configuration files, Compliance Operator was unable to correctly choose what SSH configuration options should take precedence. With this release, remediating SSH findings only results in updating a single rule instead of updating remediation for all SSH rules. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-3916[CMP-3916]).

Author: Excepted for release notes.

> *  Previously, for multiple SSH configuration drop-in configuration files, Compliance Operator was unable to correctly choose what SSH configuration options should take precedence.  With this release, remediating SSH findings only results in updating a single rule instead of updating remediation for all SSH rules. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-3916[CMP-3916]).

Author: Done, thank  you.

> *  Previously, for multiple SSH configuration drop-in configuration files, Compliance Operator was unable to correctly choose what SSH configuration options should take precedence.  With this release, remediating SSH findings only results in updating a single rule instead of updating remediation for all SSH rules. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-3916[CMP-3916]).

Author: Except for release notes.

> *  Before this release, File Integrity Operator (FIO) would fail when Compliance Operator (CO) is installed and runs the first scan. With this release, FIO and CO run correctly when both are installed. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4112[CMP-4112]).

Reviewer: Should we clarify that the issue manifests when FIO is installed before CO?

Author: I am glad to do that. Is it ONLY when FIO is installed before CO?

Author: Done, thank you @yuumasato

> *  Before this release, File Integrity Operator (FIO) would fail when Compliance Operator (CO) is installed and runs the first scan. With this release, FIO and CO run correctly when both are installed. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4112[CMP-4112]).

Author: Except for release notes.

> *  Before this release, if `ScanSettings` were configured to disable result storage and a platform scan was then performed after the change, the scan would hang and time out. Now, if `ScanSettings` are configured to disable result storage, the platform scan will continue to completion. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4116[CMP-4116]).

Author: Except for release notes.

> * Previously, `ProfileBundle` objects could become stuck in a PENDING state indefinitely during operator upgrades or content image changes. This would require manual intervention to resolve, such as deleting the `profileparser` deployment or restarting the operator. With this release, `ProfileBundle` controller now detects and automatically recovers from this condition with no user action required. This improvement is transparent and does not affect any APIs, custom resources, or configuration. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4117[CMP-4117]).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Previously, `ProfileBundle` objects could become stuck in a PENDING state indefinitely during Operator upgrades or content image changes. This would require manual intervention to resolve, such as deleting the `profileparser` deployment or restarting the Operator. With this release, `ProfileBundle` controller now detects and automatically recovers from this condition with no user action required. This improvement is transparent and does not affect any APIs, custom resources, or configuration. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4117[CMP-4117]).
```

> * Previously, `ProfileBundle` objects could become stuck in a PENDING state indefinitely during operator upgrades or content image changes. This would require manual intervention to resolve, such as deleting the `profileparser` deployment or restarting the operator. With this release, `ProfileBundle` controller now detects and automatically recovers from this condition with no user action required. This improvement is transparent and does not affect any APIs, custom resources, or configuration. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4117[CMP-4117]).

Author: Except for release notes.

> *  Before this release, Compliance Operator rules did not add the proper annotation for CIS 1.7, which resulted in failure of the annotation and results not being displayed in ACS. Now, when annotations are added, the checks appear in the final ACS report and the compliance dashboard with the correct control tag. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4120[CMP-4120]).

Reviewer: The issue was not specific to version 1.7, and in this release we are updating the CIS profile to 1.9.0. So I guess it makes sense to make the note version agnostic?
```suggestion
*  Before this release, Compliance Operator rules did not add the proper annotation for rules selected in CIS profiles, which resulted in absence of the annotation and results not being displayed in ACS. Now, when annotations are added, the checks appear in the final ACS report and the compliance dashboard with the correct control tag. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4120[CMP-4120]).
```

Author: Got it, thank you @yuumasato

> *  Before this release, Compliance Operator rules did not add the proper annotation for CIS 1.7, which resulted in failure of the annotation and results not being displayed in ACS. Now, when annotations are added, the checks appear in the final ACS report and the compliance dashboard with the correct control tag. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4120[CMP-4120]).

Author: Except for release notes.

[id="compliance-operator-release-notes-1-9-0_{context}"]
== OpenShift Compliance Operator 1.9.0

The following advisory is available for the OpenShift Compliance Operator 1.9.0:

* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHSA-2026:8433[RHSA-2026:8433 - OpenShift Compliance Operator 1.9.0 bug fix and enhancement update]

[id="compliance-operator-1-9-0-new-features-and-enhancements_{context}"]
=== New features and enhancements

* With this update, the Compliance Operator provides the Common Expression Language (CEL) scanner in Tech Preview status. The CEL scanner implements the `CustomRule` Custom Resource Definition (CRD), providing a method for administrators to define and enforce custom security policies using CEL expressions. This new content format has been expanded to `Rules` also, in Tech Preview status. CEL does not replace the existing XCCDF (Extensible Configuration Checklist Description Format) profiles but extends the ability to comply with custom security policies. For more information, see (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CMP-4134[CMP-4134]).

> * Previously, customers were unable to attach and retrieve custom metadata (such as business-specific identifiers or severity ratings) on the final compliance check results. Attempts to add these attributes directly to `ComplianceRule` and `TailoredProfile` failed to propagate the metadata to the resulting `ComplianceCheckResult`. With this release, Compliance Operator now allows custom attributes defined in `ComplianceRule` objects to be automatically propagated to the corresponding `ComplianceCheckResult` objects. For more information, see (link:https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CMP-3974[CMP-3974])

Reviewer: > customers were unable to attach and retrieve custom metadata (such as business-specific identifiers or severity ratings) on the final compliance check results

This could be misleading, it is not that they were not able to attach metadata to the CCR, they could, but the data wouldn't persist a re-scan.

The first two note adds a tone of a bugfix, what if if we dropt them and just start from `With this release, ....` LIke the note below about CIS 1.9.0?

Author: Yes, agreed! Thank you!

[id="compliance-operator-1-7-1-bug-fixes_{context}"]
=== Bug fixes

> * Previously, the Compliance Operator's `pauser` container could be terminated due to running out of memory, showing the status `OOMKilled`. With this update, the memory limit for the `pauser` container is increased to prevent the error and improve overall stability. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-50924[OCPBUGS-50924])

Author: Fixed, thank you.
